---
layout: post
category: blog
title: "Non vitae, sed scolae discimus "
tags: education, functional language
date: 2016-10-19
permalink: non-vitae
description: "The problem of non-practical education"
---
These thoughts were inspired by the Stoic philosopher Seneca, who was highly critical of the educational system of his time. Hence this quote: “We learn for school rather than for life.” 

Unfortunately, this describes far too many language classrooms. I became greatly disillusioned with studying Russian at my university as first and second year classes were overloaded with vocabulary from Pushkin and 19th-century literature. I didn't experience any living links with the language until I made my escape to study in Kyrgyzstan. Suddenly, Russian became a tool to survive rather than an academic subject. Needless to say, I didn't use any of the literary words that I learned in my formal studies, but after starting from scratch, I was finally able to function in a Russian-speaking society without too much trouble. It's worth noting, that I have seen American professors and graduate students of Russian unable to carry on the most basic of conversations. These same people unabashedly tell me minutes later that they are working on some translation of whatever obscure piece of Russian literature. I had similar experiences in China despite not even having studied Chinese formally. 

As a teacher, I've had students explain to me in Russian which English certificates they have received. One of my favorite incidents was a Ukrainian teacher of English yelling at me (in Russian) that I just don't understand English grammar. Apparently, some skepticism towards the orthodoxy of grammatical prescriptivism means that I don't understand the grammar of my native language.  

The thing is that all these people do well in school and flourish in academia. They get wonderful grades, distinctions, scholarships and all of that. I was never a terrible student, but my grades were mostly mediocre. In some of my required general studies classes, I barely passed. This is Seneca's point: the knowledge gained in an academic setting is more often than not domain specific to the classroom. If you are going to live a life confined to academia, then there is no problem with this. Otherwise, if you need to function in the realm outside of certificates and grades you have a huge hurdle to overcome if you want to apply knowledge from the classroom to real-life task. 

Whether you are a teacher or a student of English, or anything else for that matter, you should constantly be checking whether your class is domain specific for the classroom or focused on functional knowledge. If you are able to complete advanced grammar exercises with ease, yet can't follow a movie in English without subtitles this is a red flag. If you are teaching a grammatical structure without a real-life context in which it would be used, you need to revisit your lesson plans. 

Everything you do in the classroom should either be directly functional or serve as scaffolding for future functional language. There's a clear difference between learning future perfect continuous so that you can claim to know all of the English tenses – I've met people who have done just this “even though you never use future perfect continuous.” On the other hand, I've taught lessons where students have to communicate with a boss about resources used on a projected that hasn't been completed yet. Naturally, the target language of “I will have been working on this project for three weeks by the time it's completed” comes up. Students tend to remember and be able to use the latter, while the former is great for passing a test to get a certificate. 