---
layout: default
category: blog
title: "The Self-Contained Illusion"
tags: ["education", "lesson planning"]
date: 2016-10-20
permalink: /blog/self-contained-illusion
description: "This post is an introduction to the concept behind my blog"
---
#### The Self-Contained Illusion
There's a growing trend to fit as much as possible into self-contained lessons. The logic of this stems from the brutal reality of teaching: students often miss lessons, don't do homework and otherwise lead busy lives. That's why many schools only offer self contained lessons: dealing with the chaos of students who missed a lesson last week that was necessary in order to participate in today's lesson quickly highlights the allure of self-contained lessons. This phenomenon isn't only taking place with English; drop in yoga classes share the same philosophy. As far as I can tell, the martial arts are about the last hold out in the world of training and adult education that insist on mastering forms and sequential learning under the critical guidance of a teacher. 

This is all well and good as far as it goes. It's certainly a reflection of our reality, but it is far from the best way to learn. Now that I'm forced to make many of my classes self contained, there is a push for self-contained segments within each class: each twenty minutes of a sixty minute class becoming a mini-lesson that could stand in isolation. The reasoning is impeccable – if half of the students are five to ten minutes late and understanding the core section of the class builds on what was presented during the warmer, what's the point? We're at the border, or perhaps past, the point of how much further this reductionism can go without entirely losing any semblance of education. 

I don't have an easy solution. Where I'd look to for inspiration are the ideas of deep work and deliberate practice (search for Cal Newport and Anders Ericsson, respectively). The same factors that lead to dispersion and shallow work are causing English classes to be less coherent and further from the style of deliberate practice that is needed to actually improve beyond an intermediate level. This means setting priorities – if English is high enough on your list: be on time for class, turn off your phone and be prepared to do some homework. If English isn't that high of a priority, you'd probably be better off focusing your energy on what is a priority rather than wasting a few hours a week on superficial classes that don't amount to deliberate practice. 

The lack of coherence within even a single class makes it impossible to take a full hour to flesh out a complex topic and for students to start making connections on their own. I can't offer an effective student discovery task that takes twenty to thirty minutes as students come and go. Building on what was done previously doesn't work when half of the people in the room weren't at the last lesson. In many cases, I'm left to teach shallow lessons that are little more than entertainment. 

The solution is radical and revolutionary, making it difficult to implement on a large scale. We need to entirely rethink how we focus and prioritize. If responding to every email and message within seconds rather than hours is critical, it isn't going to be possible to enter the mental state necessary for deep learning, which, in turn, means that the depth required to master English will never be achieved. We've become so enmeshed in noise that we're missing the signal. Even if you make it through an entire class without an email, the fact that you checked your email several times means that you weren't able to enter a state of deep work. Something to consider: if your job requires only shallow and dispersed attention, it will almost certainly be replaced by AI in the not too distant future. It's time to focus and create depth, meaning and coherence in our profession lives. 